Contestants called "housemates" live together in a specially constructed house that is isolated from the outside world. Housemates are voted out, usually on a weekly basis, until only one remains and wins the cash prize. During their stay in the house, contestants are continuously monitored by live television cameras as well as personal audio microphones.

The program relies on techniques such as a scripted back-to-basics environment, evictions, weekly tasks, competitions set by Bigg Boss, and the “confession room” where housemates converse with Bigg Boss and nominate the housemates they wish to evict from the house. The housemates with the most nominations are then announced, and viewers are given the opportunity to vote via SMS or online through social media and smartphone applications for the nominee they wish to save from eviction. The last person standing is declared the winner.

The contestants are required to indulge in housework and are assigned tasks by the omnipresent authority figure known to them as Bigg Boss. The tasks are designed to test the teamwork abilities and community spirit of the housemates. The luxury budget is a weekly allowance to buy luxury food items other than the supplied essentials which depend on the outcome of assigned tasks.

History
Creation
Bigg Boss is a Hindi language adaptation of Big Brother created in Netherlands by John de Mol Jr., largely based on the Celebrity Big Brother model owned by the Endemol Shine Group. The show was named Bigg Boss and a house was constructed for the show at Lonavla for season one to four and six to twelve, in Karjat for season five and in Goregaon from season thirteen onwards. Bigg Boss debuted on television in 2006 through Sony TV with Arshad Warsi as the host. The show gained popularity after Shilpa Shetty emerged as the winner in Big Brother 5 and replaced Warsi as the host in the second season of Bigg Boss.[4] From the second season, the show's broadcast moved to Viacom 18's Colors TV. For third season Amitabh Bachchan hosted the show respectively and Salman Khan continued as a host from fourth season onwards, while Sanjay Dutt also hosted for fifth season along with Salman Khan. Farah Khan hosted the spin off season of eighth season in absence of main host Salman Khan.

Expansion
The show's acceptance and success among the Indian audience paved way for its expansion into other Indian languages.[5] After the sixth season wrapped in 2013, Kannada and Bengali adaptations were created by Endemol through ETV Network.[6] Sudeep hosted the Kannada version, and Mithun Chakraborty and Jeet hosted the Bengali version.[7] While the Kannada version continued with new seasons annually, similar to Hindi, the Bengali version completed only two seasons in six years and did not turn out to be as successful.[8]

In 2017, upon completion of ten seasons in Hindi, four seasons in Kannada and two seasons in Bengali, Endemol Shine India extended its presence in South India by creating Tamil and Telugu versions of the show with Star India. The Tamil version was hosted by Kamal Haasan,[9] while the Telugu version started with Jr NTR as the host, and later for the second season Nani became the host. From the third season onwards Nagarjuna became the host.[10][11][12] In 2018, the show was adapted into Marathi under Viacom 18 and hosted by Mahesh Manjrekar later from fifth season Riteish Deshmukh hosted show.[13] The next language adaptation was Malayalam, which was produced by Star India and hosted by Mohanlal. In 2021, another version was adopted called Bigg Boss OTT. Its episodes were shown on Voot later on JioCinema and hosted by Karan Johar, Salman Khan, Anil Kapoor.[14][15][16]